Rdasadhikari/docs 9608 syntheticsemail (#27188)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/synthetics/guide/otp-email-synthetics-test.md

  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about Synthetic Browser tests"
- link: "/synthetics/api_tests/http_tests#variables"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about Synthetic test variables"
- link: "/synthetics/guide/email-validation"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about email validation in Browser tests"
- link: "/synthetics/troubleshooting/?tab=common"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Synthetic Monitoring Troubleshooting"
- link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/test-creation-best-practices/'
  tag: 'Blog'
  text: 'Best practices for creating end-to-end tests'
---

<div class="alert alert-info">Extracting one-time passcodes from an email body is only supported for synthetic browser tests.</div>

## Overview

 Synthetic browser tests are to used monitor your applications such as how your customers experience your webpages end-to-end. When testing a sign up or login flow, a one-time-passcode (OTP) can be sent to an email address for authentication which you need to incorpate into your test. This OTP token can be extracted from an email body for testing within an application.

This guide walks you through how to configure the OTP extraction for a synthetic browser test.

> ## Setup

Author: Sure thing, removing it

> ## Setup

Author: Taking another look I initially left the header in so the labeling on the right-hand column looks more cohesive much like this doc: https://docs.datadoghq.com/real_user_monitoring/mobile_and_tv_monitoring/android/setup/?tab=rum#track-background-events

<img width="189" alt="2025-01-24_10-31-42" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8f62cc59-e2d2-4001-8594-f763d798eed8" />

Would we still want to remove it?

### Step 1 - Create an email variable

Create a [email variable][8] for the [browser test][3] to pull from using a [local variable][1]. 

> 1. Under **Add Variable** click **Create a Local Variable**. 

Author: ### Step 1 - Create an email variable

Create an email variable for the [Browser Test][3] by using a local variable. This generates a unique [Datadog Synthetics email address][7] for the Synthetic Test run.

1. On a new or existing Browser Test, under **Variables** click **Add Variable**.
2. Next, select **Email Address** from the dropdown menu.
3. Name the variable and click **Create**.

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/email_variable.png" alt="Add a unqiue email variable" style="width:80%;" >}}

The email variable is then added to the **Variables** section in the UI in the following format:

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/email_var_example.png" alt="Example email variable in the UI" style="width:50%;" >}}

> 2. Add an **Email Address** variable to generate a [email address][7] for the synthetic test run.

Author: This section has been updated and theres additional clarifying steps

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/email_variable.png" alt="Add a unqiue email variable" style="width:80%;" >}}

### Step 2 - Inject the email address variable

> Next add a step to inject the email adress variable into an input field to imitate how a user would input the email address within your application.

Author: I see the updated screenshot has been added.

Updating the wording and adding an additional line or two on how the user can record or manually add the step and what it looks like.

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/email_address_variable.png" alt="Inject the email variable" style="width:60%;" >}}

Now the browser test can access the email body for use in the rest of the sign-up flow.

### Step 3 - Extract the OTP from the email body

Define a test step to extract the OTP from the email body once it has been sent and store it in a variable. In this example, the variable is named `OTP_FROM_EMAIL` for later reference within the guide. 

> 1. Under **Add a variable** select **from Email body**.

Author: We discussed in the connect we don't have specific application screenshots for UI result examples but the current steps are detailed for what the user needs to do.
Creating a Jira card for the potential DD app interface to be added in the future.

| 4 Digit OTP                        | 1234                                         | `/[0-9]{4,4}/`                           |
| 6 Digit OTP                        | 123456                                       | `/[0-9]{6,6}/`                           |
| 5 Character                        | abcde                                        | `/[a-z]{5,5}/`                           |
| Alphanumerical OTP                 | a1b2cd34                                     | `/[a-zA-Z0-9]{8,8}/`                       |

### Step 4 - Use a JavaScript assertion to insert the OTP

JavaScript lets you trigger an event on a DOM element programmatically, making it possible to mimic user interactions or other events. Depending on how your input element is built, dispatching an event may be required to enable custom behaviors or testing event listeners tied to the element.

1. Add a [JavaScript assertion step][5] to input the stored OTP variable, in our example `OTP_FROM_EMAIL`, into the appropriate field in your application. 

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/js_assertion.png" alt="Javascript assertion" style="width:50%;" >}}

> 2. Under **Custom JavaScript** add in the extraction code corresponding to if the OTP will be inserted into a simple text field or respective input fields. Examples for both are highlighted below:

Author: Yes that is more of what I was going for! I had some issues with the wording as that section was updated a few times.

#### Simple text field
To insert the OTP into a simple text field use the following:
{{< code-block lang="java" disable_copy="false" >}}
function (vars, element) {
  element.setAttribute('value', vars.OTP_FROM_EMAIL);
  element.dispatchEvent(new Event("input", { bubbles: true }));
  return true;
}
{{< /code-block >}}

Below is a visual example of an OTP setup with a simple text field that the above query can be used for:

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/simple_otp.png" alt="example of an otp with a simple text field" style="width:40%;" caption="Example of an OTP with with a simple text field" >}}

**Note**: For both of the Javascript examples you need to replace the `OTP_FROM_EMAIL` field with the name of the email variable you defined if named differently in your browser test.

#### Respective input fields

> To insert the OTP into seperately defined fields use the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To insert the OTP into separately defined fields, use the following:
```

{{< code-block lang="java" disable_copy="false" >}}
function (vars) {
  const inputList = document.querySelectorAll('input');
  inputList.forEach((element) => {
      element.setAttribute('value', vars.OTP_FROM_EMAIL);
      element.dispatchEvent(new Event("input", { bubbles: true }));
  });
  return true;
}
{{< /code-block >}}

> Below is a visual example of an OTP setup with seperately defined fields that the above query can be used for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a visual example of an OTP setup with separately defined fields that the above query can be used for:
```

> {{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/bubble_otp.png" alt="example of an otp with individual numerical fields" style="width:40%;" caption="Example of an OTP with respective input fields" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/bubble_otp.png" alt="Example of an OTP with individual numerical fields" style="width:40%;" caption="Example of an OTP with respective input fields" >}}
```

## Next steps

> Once the OTP is inserted and verified, you can continue to add steps to your browser test to verify that the user has completed the sign-up flow of your application such as adding an [assertion][6] that specific text is present on the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the OTP is inserted and verified, you can continue adding steps to your browser test to verify that the user has completed the sign-up flow of your application such as adding an [assertion][6] that specific text is present on the page.
```

> From here you can continue [recording the rest of your browser test][9] and then look into your [browser test results][10].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From here, you can continue [recording the rest of your browser test][9] and then verify your [browser test results][10].
```

## Setup

### Step 1 - Create an email variable

Follow the steps below to create an email variable for the [Browser Test][3]. This generates a unique [Datadog Synthetics email address][7] for the Synthetic Test run.

1. On a new or existing Browser Test, under **Variables** click **Add Variable**.
2. Next, select **Email Address** from the dropdown menu.
3. Name the variable and click **Create**.

   {{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/email_variable.png" alt="Add a unqiue email variable" style="width:80%;" >}}

   This adds the email variable to the **Variables** section in the UI:

   {{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/email_var_example.png" alt="Example email variable in the UI" style="width:50%;" >}}

### Step 2 - Inject the email address variable

Next, [record steps][11] to insert the email address variable into an input field to imitate how a user would add the email address within your application.

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/email_injection.mp4" alt="Example of recording the email address injection steps" video="true" width="100%">}}

> 1. First click **Record** at the top of the test. This will automatially add steps to the test based on the detected interactions and inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. First click **Record** at the top of the test. This automatically adds steps to the test based on the detected interactions and inputs.
```

> 2. Next click the email input field which creates a **Click** step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click the email input field, which creates a **Click** step.
```

> 3. Then go up to the email variable created earlier, in this example called `DD_EMAIL_ADDRESS`. On the right click **Inject variable in a text input** and click on the desired text box, which will be highlighted in the UI, which then inserts the email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Find the email variable created earlier, called `DD_EMAIL_ADDRESS` in this example. On the right, click **Inject variable in a text input** and click the desired text box, which is highlighted in the UI. The email gets inserted.
```

   {{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/synthetics-otp-inject-variable.png" alt="Inject the email variable" style="width:60%;" >}}

> Once the email is sent containing the OTP now the Browser Test can access the email body for use in the rest of the sign-up flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the email containing the OTP is sent, the Browser Test can access the email body for use in the rest of the sign-up flow.
```

### Step 3 - Extract the OTP from the email body

> Next define a test step to extract the OTP from the email body once it has been sent and store it in a variable. In this example, the variable is named `OTP_FROM_EMAIL` for later reference within the guide. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to define a test step that extracts the OTP from the email body once it has been sent and store it in a variable. In this example, the variable is named `OTP_FROM_EMAIL` for later reference within the guide. 
```

| 6 Digit OTP                        | 123456                                       | `/[0-9]{6,6}/`                           |
| 5 Character                        | abcde                                        | `/[a-z]{5,5}/`                           |
| Alphanumerical OTP                 | a1b2cd34                                     | `/[a-zA-Z0-9]{8,8}/`                       |

Now the OTP will be stored in the variable for use in your Browser Test.

### Step 4 - Use a JavaScript assertion to insert the OTP

JavaScript lets you trigger an event on a DOM element programmatically, making it possible to mimic user interactions or other events. Depending on how your input element is built, dispatching an event may be required to enable custom behaviors or testing event listeners tied to the element. You can use a Javascript assertion to add the saved OTP from the email and insert it into your application.

1. Add a [JavaScript assertion step][5] to input the stored OTP variable, in our example `OTP_FROM_EMAIL`, into the appropriate field in your application. 

> {{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/js_assertion.png" alt="Javascript assertion" style="width:50%;" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   {{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/js_assertion.png" alt="Javascript assertion" style="width:50%;" >}}
```

function (vars) {
  const inputList = document.querySelectorAll('input');
  inputList.forEach((element) => {
      element.setAttribute('value', vars.OTP_FROM_EMAIL);
      element.dispatchEvent(new Event("input", { bubbles: true }));
  });
  return true;
}
{{< /code-block >}}

Below is a visual example of an OTP setup with separately defined fields that the above query can be used for:

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/otp-from-email-body/bubble_otp.png" alt="Example of an OTP with individual numerical fields" style="width:40%;" caption="Example of an OTP with respective input fields" >}}

## Next steps

Once the OTP is inserted and verified, you can continue adding steps to your Browser Test to verify that the user has completed the sign-up flow of your application such as adding an [assertion][6] that specific text is present on the page.
From here, you can continue [recording the rest of your Browser Test][9] and then verify your [Browser Test results][10].

## Further Reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /synthetics/browser_tests/?tab=requestoptions#create-local-variables
[2]: https://app.datadoghq.com/synthetics/settings/variables

> [3]: https://app.datadoghq.com/synthetics/create

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[3]: https://app.datadoghq.com/synthetics/browser/create
```
this needs updated, otherwise it was going to the API creation page
